---
layout: post
title: "LCA Hobart: Burning Down the castle"
date: 2018-02-02
tags:
- Conferences
- Maintainer-Stuff
---
I've done a talk about the kernel community. It's a hot take, but with the
feedback I've received thus far I think it was on the spot, and started a lot of
uncomfortable, but necessary discussion. I don't think it's time yet to give up
on this project, even if it will take years.

Without further ado [the recording of my talk "Burning Down the Castle is on
youtueb"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BB0luXmuo3g&t=90s). For those who
prefer reading, LWN has you covered with ["Too many lords, not enough
stewards"](https://lwn.net/Articles/745817/). I think Jake Edge and Jon Corbet
have done an excellent job in capturing my talk in a balanced fashion.

## Further Discussion

For understanding abuse dynamics I can't recommend ["Why Does He Do That?:
Inside the Minds of Angry and Controlling Men" by Lundy
Bancroft](https://www.amazon.de/Why-Does-He-That-Controlling/dp/0425191656)
enough. All the examples are derived from a few decades of working with abusers
in personal relationships, but the patterns and archetypes that Lundy Bancroft
extracts transfers extremely well to any other kind of relationship, whether
that's work, family or open source communities.

There's endless amounts of stellar talks about building better communities. I'd
like to highlight just two: ["Life is better with Rust's community automation"
by Emily Dunham](https://www.youtube.com/watch?time_continue=2&v=dIageYT0Vgg)
and ["Have It Your Way: Maximizing Drive-Thru Contribution" by VM
Brasseur](https://www.youtube.com/watch?time_continue=1&v=q3ie1duhpCg). For
learning more there's lots of great community topic tracks at various
conferences, but also dedicated ones - often as unconferences:  [Community
Leadership Summit](http://www.communityleadershipsummit.com), including its
various offsprings and [maintainerati](https://maintainerati.org/) are two I've
been at and learned a lot.

Finally there's the fun of trying to change a huge existing organization with
lots of inertia. ["Leading Change" by John
Kotter](https://www.amazon.de/Leading-Change-New-Preface-Author/dp/1422186431)
has some good insights and frameworks to approach this challenge.

Despite what it might look like I'm not quitting kernel hacking nor the X.org
community, and I'm happy to discuss my talk over mail and in upcoming hallway
tracks.
