---
layout: post
title: "Why no 2D Userspace API in DRM?"
tags:
- In-Depth Tech
---
The DRM (direct rendering manager, not the content protection stuff) graphics
subsystem in the linux kernel does not have a generic 2D accelaration api.
Despite an awful lot of of GPUs having more or less featureful blitter
units. And many systems need them for a lot of use-cases, because the 3D engine
is a bit too slow or too power hungry for just rendering desktops.

It's a FAQ why this doesn't exist and why it won't get added, so I figured I'll
answer this once and for all.

<!--more-->

Bit of nomeclatura upfront: A 2D engine (or blitter) is a bit of hardware that
can copy stuff with some knowledge of the 2D layout usually used for pixel
buffers.  Some blitters also can do more like basic blending, converting color
spaces or stretching/scaling. A 3D engine on the other hand is the fancy bit of
high performance compute block, which run small programs (called shaders) on
a massively parallel archicture. Generally with huge memory bandwidth and a
dedicated controller to feed this beast through an asynchronous command buffer.
3D engines happen to be really good at rendering the pixels for 3D action games,
among other things.

## There's no 2D Acceleration Standard

3D has it easy: There's OpenGL and Vulkan and DirectX that require a certain
feature set. And huge market forces that make sure if you use these features
like a game would, rendering is fast.

Aside: This means the 2D engine in a browser actually needs to work like a
3D action game, or the GPU will crawl. The impendence mismatch compared to
traditional 2D rendering designs is huge.

On the 2D side there's no such thing: Every blitter engine is its own bespoke
thing, with its own features, limitations and performance characteristics.
There's also no standard benchmarks that would drive common performance
characteristics - today blitters are neeeded mostly in small systems, with very
specific use cases. Anything big enough to run more generic workloads will have
a 3D rendering block anyway. These systems still have blitters, but mostly just
to help move data in and out of VRAM for the 3D engine to consume.

Now the huge problem here is that you need to fill these gaps in various
hardware 2D engines using CPU side software rendering. The crux with any 2D
render design is that transferring buffers and data too often between the GPU
and CPU will kill performance. Usually the cliff is so steep that pure
CPU rendering using only software easily beats any simplistic 2D acceleration
design.

The only way to fix this is to be really careful when moving data between the
CPU and GPU for different rendering operations. Sticking to one side, even if
it's a bit slower, tends to be an overall win. But these decisions highly depend
upon the exact features and performance characteristics of your 2D engine.
Putting a generic abstraction layer in the middle of this stack, where it's guaranteed
to be if you make it a part of the kernel/userspace interface, will not result
in actual accelaration.

So either you make your 2D rendering look like it's a 3D game, using 3D
interfaces like OpenGL or Vulkan. Or you need a software stack that's bespoke to
your use-case _and_ the specific hardware you want to run on.

## 2D Accelaration is Really Hard

This is the primary reason really. If you don't believe that, look at all the
tricks a browser employs to render CSS and HTML and text really fast, while
still animating all that stuff smoothly. Yes, a web-browser is the pinnacle of
current 2D acceleration tech, and you really need all the things in there for
decent performance: Scene graphs, clever render culling, massive batching and
huge amounts of pains to make sure you don't have to fall back to CPU based
software rendering at the wrong point in a rendering pipeline. Plus managing
all kinds of assorted caches to balance reuse against running out of memory.

Unfortunately lots of people assume 2D must be a lot simpler than 3D rendering,
and therefore they can design a 2D API that's fast enough for everyone. No one
jumps in and suggests we'll have a generic 3D interface at the kernel level,
because the lessons there are very clear:

- The real application interface is fairly high level, and in userspace.

- There's a huge industry group doing really hard work to specify these
  interfaces.

- The actual kernel to userspace interfaces ends up being highly specific to the
  hardware and architecture of the userspace driver (which contains most of the
  magic). Any attempt at a generic interface leaves lots of hardware specific
  tricks and hence performance on the floor.

- 3D APIs like OpenGL or Vulkan have all the batching and queueing and memory
  management issues covered in one way or another.

There are a bunch of DRM drivers which have a support for 2D render engines
exposed to userspace. But they all use highly hardware specific interfaces,
fully streamlined for the specific engine. And they all require a decently sized
chunk of driver code in userspace to translate from a generic API to the
hardware formats. This is what DRM maintainers will recommend you to do, if you
submit a patch to add a generic 2D acceleration API.

Exactly like a 3D driver.

## If All Else Fails, There's Options

Now if you don't care about the last bit of performance, and your use-case is
limited, and your blitter engine is limited, then there's already options:

You can take whatever pixel buffer you have, export it as a dma-buf, and then
import it into some other subsystem which already has some kind of limited 2D
accelaration support. Depending upon your blitter engine, a v4l2 mem2m device,
or for simpler things there's also dmaengines.

On top, the DRM subsystem does allow you to implement the traditional
accelaration methods exposed by the fbdev subsystem. In case you have userspace
that really insists on using these; it's not recommended for anything new.

## What about KMS?

The above is kinda a lie, since the KMS (kernel modesetting) IOCTL userspace API
is a fairly full-featured 2D rendering interface. The aim of course is to render
different pixel buffers onto a screen. With the recently added writeback support
operations targetting memory are now possible.  This could be used to expose a
traditional blitter, if you only expose writeback support and no other outputs
in your KMS driver.

There's a few downsides:

- KMS is highly geared for compositing just a few buffers (hardware usually has
  a very limited set of planes). For accelerated text rendering you want to do a
  composite operation for each character, which means this has rather limited
  use.

- KMS only needs to run at 60Hz, or whatever the refresh rate of your monitor
  is. It's not optimized for efficiency at higher throughput at all.

So all together this isn't the high-speed 2D accelaration API you're looking for
either. It is a valid alternative to the options above though, e.g. instead of a
v4l2 mem2m device.

Thanks to Dave Airlie and Daniel Stone for reading and comment on drafts of this
text.
